A self-organizing map (SOM) or self-organizing feature map (SOFM) is a type of artificial neural network (ANN) that is 
trained using unsupervised learning to produce a low-dimensional (typically two-dimensional), discretized representation 
of the input space of the training samples, called a map, and is therefore a method to do dimensionality reduction. 
Self-organizing maps differ from other artificial neural networks as they apply competitive learning as opposed to 
error-correction learning (such as backpropagation with gradient descent), and in the sense that they use a neighborhood 
function to preserve the topological properties of the input space.

A self-organizing map showing U.S. Congress voting patterns. The input data was a table with a row for each member of 
Congress, and columns for certain votes containing each member's yes/no/abstain vote. The SOM algorithm arranged these 
members in a two-dimensional grid placing similar members closer together. The first plot shows the grouping when the data 
are split into two clusters. The second plot shows average distance to neighbours: larger distances are darker. The third 
plot predicts Republican (red) or Democratic (blue) party membership. The other plots each overlay the resulting map with 
predicted values on an input dimension: red means a predicted 'yes' vote on that bill, blue means a 'no' vote. The plot 
was created in Synapse.

This makes SOMs useful for visualization by creating low-dimensional views of high-dimensional data, akin to 
multidimensional scaling. The artificial neural network introduced by the Finnish professor Teuvo Kohonen in the 1980s is 
sometimes called a Kohonen map or network. The Kohonen net is a computationally convenient abstraction building on 
biological models of neural systems from the 1970s and morphogenesis models dating back to Alan Turing in the 1950s.

While it is typical to consider this type of network structure as related to feedforward networks where the nodes are 
visualized as being attached, this type of architecture is fundamentally different in arrangement and motivation.

Useful extensions include using toroidal grids where opposite edges are connected and using large numbers of nodes.

It has been shown that while self-organizing maps with a small number of nodes behave in a way that is similar to K-means, larger self-organizing maps rearrange data in a way that is fundamentally topological in character.

It is also common to use the U-Matrix.[5] The U-Matrix value of a particular node is the average distance between the node's weight vector and that of its closest neighbors.[6] In a square grid, for instance, we might consider the closest 4 or 8 nodes (the Von Neumann and Moore neighborhoods, respectively), or six nodes in a hexagonal grid.

Large SOMs display emergent properties. In maps consisting of thousands of nodes, it is possible to perform cluster operations on the map itself.